# Claim Anaylsis
## The Positive Externalities of Carbon Dioxide: Estimating the Monetary Benefits of Rising Atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> Concentrations on Global Food Production

This article aims to provide a convincing argument for the modern benefits of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations on agricultural yield and production values. Higher CO<sub>2</sub> levels are currently perceived as negative by the general public. But this article attempts to persuade the reader to consider the economic benefits of increased CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations, such as improvements in human health and increases in crop production. The author creates models using different data sets with global crop yield and production values from the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) to demonstrate the future monetary benefits of rising CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations on crop production. With the demand for greater, global food production increasing, rising CO<sub>2</sub> levels may present a solution to the problem. Although the negative implications of higher atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations still remain, this paper gives light to the situation we find ourselves in. 

The author of the article is Craig D. Idso, a global warming skeptic and current chairman for the board of *Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change*. The publisher is the *Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change* (also referred to as *CO<sub>2</sub> Science*) which is a non-profit organization that produces weekly online newsletters. The research presented in the article are reputable scientific journals and the data used to create the models was taken from FAO which is a reliable source. Most of the journal articles referenced in the paper were published within five years of the publication. The paper does not seem biased as throughout the author does mention the limitations to the models and that high CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations still present several negative externalities. On the other hand, the author is employed by a publisher which may impact the way in which the piece is presented to the reader. The author indicates in the piece that his purpose for writing the piece is because he is involved in the global warming debate for several years. 

There are numerous scientific journals regarding this topic of climate change and food security. Research shows that population growth and economic development contribute to climate change and thereby influence agricultural practices to meet the demand (Parry et al., 2004). Mahato (2014) states that implications from climate change including higher temperatures and CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations, and changes in precipitation may influence the growth rates, photosynthesis and transpiration rates, and agricultural practices (such as changes in herbicide, insecticide, and fertilizer use). Although higher CO<sub>2</sub> levels relates to higher photosynthetic rates, this does not necessarily mean food production will increase as well. Any kind of food production system is incredibly sensitive to changes in temperature and precipitation which in turn can lead to increased pest and diseases, ultimately influencing the food security of a region. Therefore, it is difficult to argue whether higher CO<sub>2</sub> levels is a positive monetary value because of the lack of food security and agricultural practices vary between regions/countries so the information cannot be generalized (Mahato, 2014). Some other model projections suggest that increased temperature and decreased soil moisture from high CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations will reduce global crop yields by 2050 (Long et al., 2006).

Overall, the article included reliable resources and most of which were published five years within the paper making it accurate. Although, the appearance of the publication does not seem professional or academic, but it does have numerous references. After conducting a thorough analysis of the topic, I found many papers expressing similar and different perspectives. Some state that increased CO<sub>2</sub> levels might result in higher crop production while others present concerns that are not accounted for in the article from *CO<sub>2</sub> Science*. They discuss the consequences that the agricultural sector will face with the higher atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations that may result in lower crop production. Therefore, I believe that although there is opposing research on the topic, the paper is still valid as the author addresses the positives and negatives to counteract any biases they may have.


## References
Idso, C.D., 2013. The Positive Externalities of Carbon Dioxide: Estimating the Monetary Benefits of Rising Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations on Global Food Production. [online] CO2 Science. Available at: <br>http://www.co2science.org/education/reports/co2benefits/co2benefits.php<br>

Long, S.P., Ainsworth, E.A., Leakey, A.D.B., Nösberger, J. and Ort, D.R., 2006. Food for Thought: Lower-Than-Expected Crop Yield Stimulation with Rising CO2 Concentrations. Science, 312(5782), pp.1918–1921.

Mahato, A., 2014. Climate Change and its Impact on Agriculture. International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, 4(4), p.6.

Parry, M.L., Rosenzweig, C., Iglesias, A., Livermore, M. and Fischer, G., 2004. Effects of climate change on global food production under SRES emissions and socio-economic scenarios. Global Environmental Change, 14(1), pp.53–67.





